+++
date = '2025-06-19T12:41:56+01:00'
draft = true
title = 'Purity, Puberty and Rewriting the Sadeian Fairy Tale: The Bloody Chamber, Wolf-Alice and The Company of Wolves by Angela Carter'
ShowReadingTime = true
ShowToc = true
tags = ["angela carter", "academic", "litcrit", "feminism"]
series = ["essays from my undergrad"]
topics = ["body horror", "reading and rereading", "fairy tales", "weird women"]
featured = false
+++

The following essay was originally submitted as my undergraduate dissertation in English Literature, originally titled 'the new skin that had been born... of her bleeding: Purity, Puberty and Rewriting the Sadeian Fairy Tale in Angela Carter's _The Bloody Chamber and Other Stories_', achieving a 70/100 mark. I decided I wanted to share it on my blog because it is my absolute baby: I put my heart and soul into this essay, and I was super happy to get a First on it. It definitely has its flaws; my main piece of feedback, that the second chapter on 'Wolf-Alice' doesn't fit very well with the rest of my argument, is definitely true. However, since the 'Wolf-Alice' chapter was my favourite to write, I've left it in. I hope you enjoy reading it!

***

## Introduction

Throughout _The Sadeian Woman_, Angela Carter’s controversial analysis of the works of the Marquis de Sade, Carter persistently draws parallels between fairy tales and the way Sade portrays women. Carter writes that Sade’s Justine, alongside ‘her literary granddaughters’, is 

> a beautiful and penniless orphan, the living image of a fairy-tale princess in disguise but a Cinderella for whom the ashes with which she is covered have become part of the skin.[^1]

Sade’s pornography, Carter argues, employs a ‘straitjacket psychology [of vice and virtue that] relates his fiction directly to the black and white ethical world of fairy tale and fable’.[^2] His libertines derive sexual pleasure from degrading the virtuous because to engage in sexual activity at all is, to them and to Sade, to be innately corrupt. Sade’s portrayal of sexuality betrays him to Carter as ‘a great puritan’.[^3] Sarah M. Henstra points to this description as evidence of Carter’s ‘performative reading’ of Sade: ‘Sade would roll in his grave at being called puritanical’.[^4] In this way, _The Sadeian Woman_ shows Carter, not complicit with Sade as many of her contemporaries argued, but ‘actively participating in the construction of meaning as the story unfolds’: Carter ‘rereads’ Sade in order to reframe the underlying ideas that produced his work.[^5]

_The Bloody Chamber and Other Stories_ continues this work, moving Carter’s reading of Sade directly onto the literary fairy tale form. What makes a “fairy tale” is ill-defined. While it has its roots in oral tradition (Carter herself used it in the title of her collection of tales from oral tradition for Virago) by 1979, its origins had been commodified by Perrault, Grimm, and, in the twentieth century, Disney. Perrault repackaged the trope of fairy tales as educational stories told by mothers to their children in his ‘Mother Goose’ tales, appending overt morals to each tale. ‘Bluebeard’, for example, as translated by Carter, declares: 
>Curiosity is the most fleeting of pleasures; the moment it is satisfied, it ceases to exist and it always proves very, very expensive.[^6]

This opposes the moral of fairy tales wherein curiosity proves a powerful tool: the English folktale ‘Mr. Fox’ sees a young woman discovering her fiancé is a murderer before she marries him, confronting him, and in doing so, saving herself.[^7] Perrault’s moral suggests the reader ought instead to ignore any suspicions about her husband’s behaviour and preserve the peace of her upper-class marriage. Disney’s early adaptations of fairy tales reiterated these ideas about class and gender. Disney’s female protagonists rarely wield the radical potential of fantasy; their virtue alone merits their rescue from poverty, while female agency is villainised and masculinised.[^8] Similarly, in _The Sadeian Woman_, Carter finds, Juliette’s sadism and sexual agency masculinise her: ‘by the force of her will, she will become… a woman who has transcended her gender but not the contradictions within it’.[^9] While Sade’s overt portrayal of gender non-conformity, including lesbianism, is ostensibly at odds with Disney’s repressive heteronormativity, Carter’s argument that Sade associates the masculinised with vice indicates both works engage with a binary attitude to gender which villainises female gender transgression.

Catherine Orenstein argues that fairy tales and pornography go hand-in-hand: ‘fairy tales are at their core about sexuality’ because they establish what ‘society deems desirable’ in men and women ‘at the most basic level’.[^10] ‘Porn merely uncovers the fairy tale’s continuing central preoccupation, which still lurks under the veneer of children’s literature’, Orenstein writes.[^11] Similarly, Bruno Bettelheim argues in _The Uses of Enchantment_ that the lack of complexity within fairy tales equips children with images they can use to interpret own lives.[^12] His approach to the gendered elements of fairy tales is functionalist: ‘Snow White’, he argues, teaches the female reader ‘she need not despair’ if her mother struggles to meet her needs, as she will be ‘saved by males’.[^13] Although Bettelheim privileges a male perspective throughout the book, referring to the reader as ‘he’ by default, this approach suggests that binaries within fairy tales facilitate the reproduction of traditional gender roles. 

_The Bloody Chamber and Other Stories_ complicates the lessons of the fairy tale, developing the violent and gendered imagery at the heart of the stories to explore and upset the patriarchal viewpoints the stories reflect. The collection’s protagonists are, for the most part, teenage girls who overcome an emotional obstacle in order to become women. This dissertation will explore how ‘The Bloody Chamber’, ‘Wolf-Alice’ and ‘The Company of Wolves’ use blood imagery to explore these rites of passage from girlhood to womanhood, with particular focus on how Carter uses fairy-tale forms to put into practise ideas she put forward in _The Sadeian Woman_. I apply Carter’s analyses of Justine and Juliette in _The Sadeian Woman_ to these stories, exploring how she breaks the either/or moulds of virtue and vice they provide. Justine is a static, unchanging sexual fantasy: she is a virgin who will always be a virgin no matter how many times she is ‘ruined’. While the libertine is drawn to her naivety, Justine’s denial of her sexual potential allows that naivety to be exploited over and over again. Justine ‘is most arousing as a memory or as a masturbatory fantasy… [otherwise] the contradictions of her situation will destroy her’.[^14] Thus, as an archetype, she can only exist within the realm of pornography or the fairy tale, where her virginity can be played out over and over again. If ‘Justine is the thesis, Juliette is the antithesis’: where Justine epitomises feminine virtue, Juliette represents the rejection of this gender role in favour of masculinised vice.[^15] Justine’s virtue is heightened in opposition to Juliette’s vice. For Carter, reading Juliette as Justine’s binary opposite illuminates the limiting nature of gendered cultural mythology: women are sexual or they are virginal, they are predator or they are prey. Carter’s tales blur these binaries in complex ways that are hard to categorise as subversive or normative.

Carter famously wrote that she was ‘in the demythologising business’, a quote often separated from what she wrote to follow: Carter reads myths as ‘extraordinary lies designed to make people unfree’, compared to folklore, which is ‘a much more straightforward set of devices for making real life more exciting and is much easier to infiltrate with different kinds of consciousness’.[^16] I use these definitions of mythology and folklore in this dissertation: using the set of devices provided by folklore, Carter explores the mythology the tales acquired in becoming ‘literary’. Additionally, I refer to the stories analysed in this dissertation as ‘tales’. In the afterword to Carter’s first short story collection, _Fireworks_, Carter argues that ‘the tale does not log everyday experience, as the short story does; it interprets everyday experience through a system of imagery derived from subterranean areas behind everyday experience’.[^17] Not only is this process of symbolism at work in the fairy tales Carter draws upon, but in the tales that she writes. Rewriting Sade’s women and the fairy tale in tandem, the Sadeian fairy tales in _The Bloody Chamber_ demythologise the portrayals of virginity that drive the two.

## i. Demythologising Justine: 'The Bloody Chamber'

[^1]: Angela Carter, _The Sadeian Woman: An Exercise in Cultural History_ (Virago Press, 1979), 64; ibid., 44. 
[^2]: Ibid., 93.
[^3]: Ibid., 162.
[^4]: Sarah M. Henstra, ‘The pressure of new wine: Performative reading in Angela Carter’s _The Sadeian Woman_’, _Textual Practise_ 13, no. 1 (1999): 113.
[^5]: Ibid., 109.
[^6]: Angela Carter, _The Fairy Tales of Charles Perrault_ (1977; repr. Penguin, 2008), 10. Carter’s translation is, by her own admission, ‘not extraordinarily accurate’; I use it here to demonstrate her engagement with Perrault’s version of ‘Bluebeard’ and development of its ideas. Angela Carter, interviewed by Susan Bernofsky, ‘We’re Not Dealing With Naturalism Here: An Interview with Angela Carter’, _Conjunctions_ 40 (2003): 169.
[^7]: ‘Mr Fox’, World of Tales, accessed May 5th, 2025, [https://www.worldoftales.com/European_folktales/English_folktale_110.html#gsc.tab=0.](https://www.worldoftales.com/European_folktales/English_folktale_110.html#gsc.tab=0)
[^8]: Many of Disney's villains are read by academics and non-academics alike as queer due to their flaunting of gender norms, thus taking part in shaping a wider cultural association between gender non-conformity and villainy. See Francesco Piluso, ‘Above the heteronormative narrative: looking up the place of Disney’s villains’, _Semiotica_ 255 (2023): 135.
[^9]: Carter, _The Sadeian Woman_, 98.
[^10]: Catherine Orenstein, _Little Red Riding Hood Uncloaked: Sex, Morality and the Evolution of a Fairy Tale_ (Basic Books, 2002), 211.
[^11]: Ibid., 211-212.
[^12]: Bruno Bettelheim, _The Uses of Enchantment_ (1976; repr. Penguin, 1991), 7.
[^13]: Ibid., 16.
[^14]: Carter, _The Sadeian Woman_, 80.
[^15]: Ibid., 91.
[^16]: Angela Carter, ‘Notes from the Front Line’, in On Gender and Writing, ed. Michelene Wandor (Pandora Press, 1983), 71.
[^17]: Angela Carter, ‘Afterword’, _Fireworks: Nine Stories in Various Disguises_ (1974; repr. Harper Colophon, 1982), 133.